U.S. Geological Survey (USGS)                         UCODE_2014(1)

NOTE: Reference to commercial products does not constitute endorsement 
            by the authors or IGWMC.

NAME:
UCODE_2014, with New Capabilities to 
o	Define Parameters Unique to Predictions, 
o	Calculate Weights using Simulated Values, 
o	Estimate Parameters with SVD, 
o	Evaluate Uncertainty with MCMC, 
o	and More

ABSTRACT
The UCODE_2014 report documents additions to the computer 
  program UCODE_2005 and implemented in UCODE_2014.  
  UCODE_2005 is described below. The new capabilities
  include support of parameters that are required for 
  predictions but that had not been considered previously in 
  model development. Examples of situations with such 
  parameters are storage parameters when calibration conditions 
  are steady-state and prediction conditions are transient, and 
  transport parameters when calibration conditions involve only 
  a flow field and prediction conditions include advective, 
  advective-dispersive, or advective-dispersive-reactive transport. 
  Second, weighting based on user-supplied coefficients of 
  variation are supported more thoroughly in UCODE_2014 
  than in previous versions of UCODE and, we believe, any other 
  available software package. Third, the use of singular value 
  decomposition (SVD) for parameter estimation has been 
  integrated into UCODE_2014 and the transparency offered to 
  SVD users by sensitivity analysis is stressed. The implementation 
  of SVD in UCODE_2014 is useful for estimating parameters in 
  some circumstances, and guidance is provided for migrating to 
  PEST when its unique capabilities are of interest. Inclusion of 
  Markov-chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) uncertainty measures 
  means that UCODE_2014 has three methods of uncertainty 
  evaluation that proceed from (i) linear uncertainty intervals 
  that are very computationally frugal (commonly 10s to 100s of 
  parallelizable model runs) and depend on the model not being 
  too nonlinear and errors being approximately Gaussian, to (ii) 
  nonlinear uncertainty intervals with moderate computational 
  demands (commonly 1,000s of model runs) and depend on 
  model smoothness and Gaussian errors, to (iii) MCMC 
  uncertainty intervals that are computationally demanding 
  (commonly 10,000s of model runs and more) and few 
  restrictive assumptions. Having this range of methods in one 
  program encourages application and exploration of the entire 
  range of methods.  

Auxiliary programs introduced since UCODE_2005 are 
  described briefly. This includes three auxiliary programs: 
  MMA for multi-model analysis, OPR-PPR for value of 
  information measures, and Sim-Adjust for when simulated 
  equivalents to observations cannot be calculated.  Three 
  graphical interfaces are also described: ModelMate for 
  constructing and running applications of UCODE_2014, 
  GW_Chart for evaluating model fit, sensitivity analysis results, 
  and uncertainty measures, including support for the new 
  capabilities, and enhancements to Model Viewer for plotting 
  objective-function surfaces using the UCODE _sos 
  data-exchange files. Two minor auxiliary codes were added: 
 "concatenate_intconfpred" which concatenates results from 
 multiple nonlinear uncertainty runs to facilitate plotting of 
 nonlinear confidence intervals that were calculated in separate 
 runs; and "convert_pest_prior_info" which reads a pest file, 
 finds the prior items and uses them to create a UCODE 
 Linear_Prior_Information input block.

Instructions are provided for using UCODE_2014 with 
  programs constructed using MATLAB and models run using 
  graphical interfaces, using HYDRUS as an example. 

Example and test cases include surface-water and groundwater 
  problems.

UCODE_2014 is constructed in a modular fashion using 
  JUPITER API conventions and modules. 


UCODE_2014 IS AN ADVANCEMENT OF UCODE_2005, THUS A DESCRIPTION OF UCODE_2005 
IS INCLUDED BELOW UNDER THE HEADING" "DESCRIPTION OF UCODE_2005"

HISTORY OF UCODE_2014

  UCODE_2014 Version 1.004 02/16/2016
    - Updated ucode version # to 1.004
    - Corrected a problem with the previous revision for printing residuals and 
      sensitivities for situations when the number of observations is less than 
      the number of parameters because this is useful when investigating the 
      value of potential new observations. Warning messages are included to 
      alert the user that this combination of observations and parameters would 
      not work in a parameter estimation. The previous version over wrote some
      underscore files from regression runs when making prediction runs.
    - In addition, more signififcant figures are printed in the _pcc file. 

  UCODE_2014 Version 1.003 01/31/2016
    - Updated ucode version # to 1.003
    - Adjusted ucode to print residuals and sensitivities for situations when 
      the number of observations is less than the number of parameters because 
      this is useful when investigating the values of potential new 
      observations. Warning messages are included to alert the user that this
      combination of observations and parameters would not work in a parameter 
      estimation
    - The ucode distribution now includes a number of programs that use results 
      from UCODE. These programs use the sensitivities and statistics calculated 
      by UCODE to provide uncertainty measures (e.g. linear uncertainty, and 
      MMA - multi-model analysis), to evaluate observations and parameters 
      important to predictions (e.g. OPR-PPR), and to accommodate conditions 
      for which simulated values cannot be produced as originally expected 
      (e.g. Sim_Adjust). These capabilities can be very useful in practice.
    - Most of these programs are described in the UCODE_2005 documentation 
      report and are included in the UCODE directory of this distribution. 
      Three are described in separate reports and are included in separate 
      directories. These three are OPR-PPR, MMA, and Sim_Adjust. 
    
  UCODE_2014 Version 1.002 08/29/2015
    - Updated ucode version # to 1.002
    - Minor corrections were made to the UCODE_2014_User_Manual.pdf which is now
      called UCODE_2014_User_Manual-version02.pdf
    - Corrected bug in MCMC simulation that occurred when both the non-uniform 
      and multivariate normal prior distributions are used
         
  UCODE_2014 Version 1.001 06/13/2015
    - Updated ucode version # to 1.001
    - Added the value of the DETERMINANT OF CORRELATION MATRIX to the _dm file
    - Added the value of the CONDITION NUMBER to the _dm file. The condition
      number is the maximum singular value divided by the minimum singular value
    - Added a check for perturbed value having an omit default value and if so
      setting the associated residual/sensitivity to have a weight of zero
    - Removed printing of warning that there are more adjustable parameters
      than observations when running in prediction mode
    - Corrected a typo on a matrix dimension that would have caused a memory
      overflow and termination if a large number of observations were used and 
      no prior information was included.
    - Corrected issue in which parallel function was disablled as UCODE 
      transitioned from a sensitivity evaluation to an SVD optimization. 
        
  UCODE_2014 Version 1.000 01/08/2015
    - First release

DESCRIPTION OF UCODE_2005:

UCODE_2005 and its six post-processors can be used with existing 
     process models to perform sensitivity analysis, data needs
     assessment, calibration, prediction, and uncertainty analysis.  Any
     process model or set of models can be used; the only requirements
     are that models have numerical (ASCII or text only) input and
     output files, that the numbers in these files have sufficient
     significant digits, that all required models can be run from a
     single batch file or script, and that simulated values are
     continuous functions of the parameter values.  Process models
     can include pre-processors and post-processors as well as one or
     more models related to the processes of interest (physical,
     chemical, and so on), making UCODE_2005 extremely powerful.
     An estimated parameter can be a quantity that appears in the
     input files of the process model(s), or a quantity used in an
     equation that produces a value that appears in the input files.
     In the latter situation, the equation is user-defined.

     UCODE_2005 can compare observations and simulated equivalents. 
     The simulated equivalents can be any simulated value written in the
     process-model output files or can be calculated from simulated
     values with user-defined equations. The quantities can be model
     results, or dependent variables. For example, for ground-water
     models they can be heads, flows, concentrations, and so on. Prior,
     or direct, information on estimated parameters also can be
     considered. Statistics are calculated to quantify the comparison
     of observations and simulated equivalents, including a weighted
     least-squares objective function. In addition, data-exchange files
     are produced that facilitate graphical analysis.

     UCODE_2005 can be used fruitfully in model calibration through
     its sensitivity analysis capabilities and its ability to
     estimate parameter values that result in the best possible fit to
     the observations. Parameters are estimated using nonlinear
     regression: a weighted least-squares objective function is minimized
     with respect to the parameter values using a modified Gauss-Newton
     method or a double-dogleg technique.  Sensitivities needed for the
     method can be read from files produced by process models that can
     calculate sensitivities, such as MODFLOW-2000, or can be calculated
     by UCODE_2005 using a more general, but less accurate, forward- or
     central-difference perturbation technique. Problems resulting from
     inaccurate sensitivities and solutions related to the perturbation
     techniques are discussed in the report. Statistics are calculated
     and printed for use in (1) diagnosing inadequate data and identifying
     parameters that probably cannot be estimated; (2) evaluating
     estimated parameter values; and (3) evaluating how well the model
     represents the simulated processes.

     Results from UCODE_2005 and codes RESIDUAL_ANALYSIS and
     RESIDUAL_ANALYSIS_ADV can be used to evaluate how accurately the
     model represents the processes it simulates. Results from
     LINEAR_UNCERTAINTY can be used to quantify the uncertainty of model
     simulated values if the model is sufficiently linear. Results from
     MODEL_LINEARITY and MODEL_LINEARITY_ADV can be used to evaluate 
     model linearity and, thereby, the accuracy of the LINEAR_UNCERTAINTY
     results. UCODE_2005 can also be used to calculate nonlinear confidence
     and prediction intervals, which quantify the uncertainty of model
     simulated values when the model is not linear. CORFAC_PLUS can be
     used to produce factors that allow intervals to account for model
     intrinsic nonlinearity and small-scale variations in system
     characteristics that are not explicitly accounted for in the model
     or the observation weighting.

     The six post-processing programs of UCODE_2005 can use the results of 
     other programs that produce the required data-exchange files.

     UCODE_2005 and the other six codes are intended for use on any computer
     operating system. The programs consist of algorithms programmed in
     Fortran 90/95, which efficiently performs numerical calculations.
     The model runs required to obtain perturbation sensitivities can be
     performed using multiple processors. The programs are constructed
     in a modular fashion using JUPITER API conventions and modules. For
     example, the data-exchange files and input blocks are JUPITER API
     conventions and many of those used by UCODE_2005 are read or written
     by JUPITER API modules. UCODE-2005 includes capabilities likely to be
     required by many applications (programs) constructed using the JUPITER
     API, and can be used as a starting point for such programs.
   

VERSIONS OF UCODE_2014:    

     UCODE_2014 Version 1.000 02/12/2015 - Initial release.


DATA REQUIREMENTS
     In order to use UCODE_2014, the process model needs to be constructed 
     and the main UCODE_2014 input file needs to be created. Input data are
     read from files.


SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
     UCODE_2014 is written primarily in Fortran 90. The code has been used on
     UNIX-based computers and personal computers running various forms of the
     Microsoft Windows operating system.


CONTACTS

    Eileen Poeter, PhD, PE
    Poeter Engineering
    Past Director Integrated Ground Water Modeling Center
    Emeritus Professor, Colorado School of Mines
    Golden, Colorado 80401
    USA

    epoeter@mines.edu

    Mary C. Hill, PhD, PE
    Professor, University of Kansas
    320B Lindley
    Department of Geology
    University of Kansas
    Lawrence, KS  66049

    mchill@ku.edu

    See       
      http://water.usgs.gov/software/ordering_documentation.html
      for information on ordering printed copies of USGS publications.
