

U.S. Geological Survey (USGS)                         MMA(1)

NOTE: Any use of trade, product or firm names is for descriptive
      purposes only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S.
      Government.

NAME
     MMA, A Computer Code for Multi-Model Analysis
    
ABSTRACT

This report documents the Multi-Model Analysis (MMA) computer code. MMA can be 
used to evaluate results from alternative models of a single system using the 
same set of observations for all models. As long as the observations, the 
observation weighting, and system being represented are the same, the models 
can differ in nearly any way imaginable. For example, they may include different 
processes, different simulation software, different temporal definitions (for 
example, steady-state and transient models could be considered), and so on. The 
multiple models may be calibrated by nonlinear regression or another method. Any 
calibration needs to be completed before application of MMA.

MMA can be used to rank models and calculate posterior model probabilities. 
These can be used to (1) determine the relative importance of the 
characteristics embodied in the alternative models, (2) calculate model-averaged
parameter estimates and predictions, and (3) quantify the uncertainty of 
parameter estimates and predictions in a way that integrates the variations 
represented by the alternative models. 

There is a lack of consensus on what model analysis methods are best, so MMA 
provides four default methods. Two are based on Kullback-Leibler information, 
and use the AIC (Akaike Information Criterion) or AICc (second-order-bias-
corrected AIC) model discrimination criteria. The other two default methods are 
the BIC (Bayesian Information Criterion) and the KIC (Kashyap Information 
Criterion) model discrimination criteria. Use of the KIC criterion is equivalent 
to using the maximum-likelihood Bayesian model averaging (MLBMA) method. AIC, 
AICc, and BIC can be derived from Frequentist or Bayesian arguments. The default 
methods based on Kullback-Leibler information have a number of theoretical 
advantages, including that they tend to favor more complicated models as more 
data become available than do the other methods, which makes sense in many 
situations. 

Many applications of MMA will be well served by the default methods provided. To 
use the default methods, the only required input for MMA is a list of 
directories where the files for the alternate models are located.

Evaluation and development of model-analysis methods are active areas of 
research. To facilitate exploration and innovation, MMA allows the user broad 
discretion to define alternatives to the default procedures. For example, MMA 
allows the user to (a) rank models based on model criteria defined using a wide 
range of provided and user-defined statistics in addition to the default AIC, 
AICc, BIC, and KIC criteria, (b) create their own criteria using model measures 
available from the code, and (c) define how each model criterion is used to 
calculate related posterior model probabilities. 

The default model criteria rate models based on model fit to observations, the 
number of observations and estimated parameters, and, for KIC, the Fisher 
information matrix. In addition, MMA allows the analysis to include an 
evaluation of estimated parameter values. This is accomplished by allowing the 
user to define unreasonable estimated parameter values or relative estimated 
parameter values. An example of the latter is that it may be expected that one 
parameter value will be less than another, as might be the case if two 
parameters represented the hydraulic conductivity of distinct materials such as 
fine and coarse sand. Models with parameter values that violate the user-defined 
conditions are excluded from further consideration by MMA.

Ground-water models are used as examples in this report, but MMA can be used to 
evaluate any set of models for which the required files have been produced.

MMA needs to read files from a separate directory for each alternative model 
considered. The needed files are produced when using the sensitivity-analysis or 
parameter-estimation mode of UCODE_2005, or the equivalent capability of another 
program.  

MMA is constructed using modules and conventions for data-exchange files from 
the JUPITER API, and is intended for use on any computer operating system. MMA 
consists of algorithms programmed in Fortran90, which efficiently performs 
numerical calculations.


HISTORY

     MMA Version 1.210 09/1/2011
        - Changed revision number to 1.210 
        - Corrected error in code in which the values in the column of "XTWXOBS" 
          of the *._mma file were incorrect
        - Included latest versions of ucode and linear_uncertainty in the bin
          directory
        - Reran regressions for distribution files
        - Differences in the results of the test problems include:
            #mout files will have a different version number and date
            _mma files due to revised calculation of "XTWXOBS"
            _rank files due to revised calculation of "XTWXOBS" 
            _anals files involving KIC due to revised calculation of "XTWXOBS"
            Output files dependent on prior information because the 
              interpretation of the uncertainty on prior information input
              changed in ucode but the input files for the regression runs
              distributed with MMA have not been changed. Those files include 
              unusually large uncertainty on prior information.

     MMA Version 1.200 09/18/2010
        - Changed revision number to 1.200 
        - Corrected error in code in which the standard deviations rather than 
          the variances were summed in evaluating MMA's eq. 2.16a
        - Improved checking for analyses having the same prior
        - Revised input for regression examples to define prior in native space
        - Reran all regressions for distribution files
        - Compiled with JUPITER API 1.4.0
        
     MMA Version 1.100 10/26/2009
        - Changed revision number to 1.100
        - Added a new criterion named PriModProb which equals the prior model 
          probability if it is input by the user, otherwise all included models 
          are assigned equal probabilities (p=1/#models) that sum to one. Now 
          prior model probability can be used as a criterion or as a term in 
          the probability equation. This term now appears as a column in
          the _mma and the _rank files.
            The following input will rank models strictly by their prior model 
            probability without regard to model fit.  
              BEGIN ANALYSES TABLE
              nrow=1  ncol=3 columnlabels
              AnalysisLabel CritEqn         PrEqn
              ChooseAName   PriModelProb    1.*valcrit
              END ANALYSES
            Model probabilities are specified in the MODEL_PATHS block using 
            keyword PriorModProb. If this is not specified then the default is 
            for all models to have equal probability.
        - A new example run illustrates an analysis based solely on prior
          model probabilities. It is in  mma_1.100\test-win\01-Run_MMA and is 
          executed using mma_modprob.bat.  For this example the posterior 
          probabilities resulting from the AICc analysis of “mma_extensive.bat” 
          were used as prior model probabilities so the results of the two 
          analyses are nearly identical.
        - Added an additional default analysis based on prior model 
          probabilities so now there are 5 default analyses.
        - Revised allocation of some arrays to facilitate application with
          very large numbers of observations.
        - The highest ranked model is assigned a value of one and if two models 
          have the same value they will be given the same rank. Models that did 
          not converge are assigned a rank equal to the total number of models 
          so there may be a gap in values between their rank and the lowest  
          ranked model. Previously if two models had the same value they were 
          assigned equal rank but in that case the highest ranked model would 
          have a rank less than one.
        - Corrected an error that occurred in some instances when only some of 
          the estimated parameters were averaged or if they were not listed in 
          the same order as in the parameter estimation.
        - Corrected an error that occurred  in some instances in model averaging
          if some of the models in the group to be averaged were not included 
          due to non-convergence or unreasonable parameter values
        - Corrected an error in which the final sum of squares weighted 
          residuals was used instead of the lowest sum of squares weighted 
          residuals in cases where the final sum of squares weighted residuals
          was not the lowest
        - Compiled with JUPITER API 1.3.1
                               
     MMA Version 1.000 8/10/2007 - Initial release.
     

DATA REQUIREMENTS
     In order to use MMA, the main MMA input file needs to be created and
     refer to data_exchange files as described in the MMA documentation. 
     Input data are read from files.


SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
     MMA is written primarily in Fortran 90. The code has been used on
     UNIX-based computers and personal computers running various forms of the 
     Microsoft Windows operating system.


CONTACTS

    Eileen Poeter
    Emeritus Professor, Colorado School of Mines
    Golden, Colorado 80401
    USA

    epoeter@mines.edu

    Mary C. Hill
    U.S. Geological Survey
    National Research Program
    3215 Marine St
    Boulder, CO 80302
    USA
    
    mchill@usgs.gov

  
    See

      http://water.usgs.gov/software/ordering_documentation.html

    for information on ordering printed copies of USGS publications.
